The Project Gutenberg eBook of Emily of New Moon
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Emily of New Moon

Author: L. M. Montgomery

Illustrator: Maria Louise Kirk

Release date: January 25, 2020 [eBook #61236]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jim Adcock, Sue Clark and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMILY OF NEW MOON ***

[Illustration: “AND THEN IN ONE GLORIOUS, SUPREME MOMENT CAME THE
‘FLASH’”]




  EMILY
  OF NEW MOON

  BY
  L. M. MONTGOMERY

  _Author of “Anne of Green Gables,” “The Story Girl,” “Rainbow Valley,”
  “Rilla of Ingleside,” “Anne’s House of Dreams,” etc._

  _WITH FRONTISPIECE IN COLOR BY
  M. L KIRK_

  [Illustration]

  NEW YORK
  FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
  MCMXXIII




  _Copyright, 1923, by_
  FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

  _All Rights Reserved_

  _Printed in the United States of America_




  To
  MR. GEORGE BOYD MACMILLAN
  ALLOA, SCOTLAND
  IN RECOGNITION OF
  A LONG AND STIMULATING FRIENDSHIP




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                    PAGE

        I THE HOUSE IN THE HOLLOW               1

       II A WATCH IN THE NIGHT                  8

      III A HOP OUT OF KIN                     19

       IV A FAMILY CONCLAVE                    33

        V DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND                  44

       VI NEW MOON                             52

      VII THE BOOK OF YESTERDAY                63

     VIII TRIAL BY FIRE                        79

       IX A SPECIAL PROVIDENCE                 91

        X GROWING PAINS                       105

       XI ILSE                                113

      XII THE TANSY PATCH                     122

     XIII A DAUGHTER OF EVE                   137

      XIV FANCY FED                           146

       XV VARIOUS TRAGEDIES                   153

      XVI CHECK FOR MISS BROWNELL             165

     XVII LIVING EPISTLES                     179

    XVIII FATHER CASSIDY                      193

      XIX FRIENDS AGAIN                       211

       XX BY AËRIAL POST                      216

      XXI “ROMANTIC BUT NOT COMFORTABLE”      227

     XXII WYTHER GRANGE                       238

    XXIII DEALS WITH GHOSTS                   247

     XXIV A DIFFERENT KIND OF HAPPINESS       257

      XXV “SHE COULDN’T HAVE DONE IT”         264

     XXVI ON THE BAY SHORE                    270

    XXVII THE VOW OF EMILY                    282

   XXVIII A WEAVER OF DREAMS                  302

     XXIX SACRILEGE                           315

      XXX WHEN THE CURTAIN LIFTED             326

     XXXI EMILY’S GREAT MOMENT                340




EMILY OF NEW MOON

CHAPTER I

THE HOUSE IN THE HOLLOW


The house in the hollow was “a mile from anywhere”--so Maywood people
said. It was situated in a grassy little dale, looking as if it had
never been built like other houses but had grown up there like a big,
brown mushroom. It was reached by a long, green lane and almost hidden
from view by an encircling growth of young birches. No other house
could be seen from it although the village was just over the hill.
Ellen Greene said it was the lonesomest place in the world and vowed
that she wouldn’t stay there a day if it wasn’t that she pitied the
child.

Emily didn’t know she was being pitied and didn’t know what
lonesomeness meant. She had plenty of company. There was Father--and
Mike--and Saucy Sal. The Wind Woman was always around; and there were
the trees--Adam-and-Eve, and the Rooster Pine, and all the friendly
lady-birches.

And there was “the flash,” too. She never knew when it might come, and
the possibility of it kept her a-thrill and expectant.

Emily had slipped away in the chilly twilight for a walk. She
remembered that walk very vividly all her life--perhaps because of a
certain eerie beauty that was in it--perhaps because “the flash” came
for the first time in weeks--more likely because of what happened
after she came back from it.

It had been a dull, cold day in early May, threatening to rain but
never raining. Father had lain on the sitting-room lounge all day. He
had coughed a good deal and he had not talked much to Emily, which was
a very unusual thing for him. Most of the time he lay with his hands
clasped under his head and his large, sunken, dark-blue eyes fixed
dreamily and unseeingly on the cloudy sky that was visible between the
boughs of the two big spruces in the front yard--Adam-and-Eve, they
always called those spruces, because of a whimsical resemblance Emily
had traced between their position, with reference to a small apple-tree
between them, and that of Adam and Eve and the Tree of Knowledge in
an old-fashioned picture in one of Ellen Greene’s books. The Tree of
Knowledge looked exactly like the squat little apple-tree, and Adam and
Eve stood up on either side as stiffly and rigidly as did the spruces.

Emily wondered what Father was thinking of, but she never bothered him
with questions when his cough was bad. She only wished she had somebody
to talk to. Ellen Greene wouldn’t talk that day either. She did nothing
but grunt, and grunts meant that Ellen was disturbed about something.
She had grunted last night after the doctor had whispered to her in the
kitchen, and she had grunted when she gave Emily a bedtime snack of
bread and molasses. Emily did not like bread and molasses, but she ate
it because she did not want to hurt Ellen’s feelings. It was not often
that Ellen allowed her anything to eat before going to bed, and when
she did it meant that for some reason or other she wanted to confer a
special favor.

Emily expected the grunting attack would wear off over night, as it
generally did; but it had not, so no company was to be found in Ellen.
Not that there was a great deal to be found at any time. Douglas Starr
had once, in a fit of exasperation, told Emily that “Ellen Greene was a
fat, lazy old thing of no importance,” and Emily, whenever she looked
at Ellen after that, thought the description fitted her to a hair.

So Emily had curled herself up in the ragged, comfortable old
wing-chair and read _The Pilgrim’s Progress_ all the afternoon. Emily
loved _The Pilgrim’s Progress_. Many a time had she walked the straight
and narrow path with _Christian_ and _Christiana_--although she never
liked _Christiana’s_ adventures half as well as _Christian’s_. For one
thing, there was always such a crowd with _Christiana_. She had not
half the fascination of that solitary, intrepid figure who faced all
alone the shadows of the Dark Valley and the encounter with Apollyon.
Darkness and hobgoblins were nothing when you had plenty of company.
But to be _alone_--ah, Emily shivered with the delicious horror of it!

When Ellen announced that supper was ready Douglas Starr told Emily to
go out to it.

“I don’t want anything tonight. I’ll just lie here and rest. And when
you come in again we’ll have a real talk, Elfkin.”

He smiled up at her his old, beautiful smile, with the love behind
it, that Emily always found so sweet. She ate her supper quite
happily--though it wasn’t a good supper. The bread was soggy and her
egg was underdone, but for a wonder she was allowed to have both Saucy
Sal and Mike sitting, one on each side of her, and Ellen only grunted
when Emily fed them wee bits of bread and butter.

Mike had such a cute way of sitting up on his haunches and catching the
bits in his paws, and Saucy Sal had _her_ trick of touching Emily’s
ankle with an almost human touch when her turn was too long in coming.
Emily loved them both, but Mike was her favourite. He was a handsome,
dark-grey cat with huge owl-like eyes, and he was so soft and fat and
fluffy. Sal was always thin; no amount of feeding put any flesh on her
bones. Emily liked her, but never cared to cuddle or stroke her because
of her thinness. Yet there was a sort of weird beauty about her that
appealed to Emily. She was grey-and-white--very white and very sleek,
with a long, pointed face, very long ears and very green eyes. She was
a redoubtable fighter, and strange cats were vanquished in one round.
The fearless little spitfire would even attack dogs and rout them
utterly.

Emily loved her pussies. She had brought them up herself, as she
proudly said. They had been given to her when they were kittens by her
Sunday School teacher.

“A _living_ present is so nice,” she told Ellen, “because it keeps on
getting nicer all the time.”

But she worried considerably because Saucy Sal didn’t have kittens.

“I don’t know why she doesn’t,” she complained to Ellen Greene. “Most
cats seem to have more kittens than they know what to do with.”

After supper Emily went in and found that her father had fallen
asleep. She was very glad of this; she knew he had not slept much
for two nights; but she was a little disappointed that they were not
going to have that “real talk.” “Real” talks with Father were always
such delightful things. But next best would be a walk--a lovely
all-by-your-lonesome walk through the grey evening of the young spring.
It was so long since she had had a walk.

“You put on your hood and mind you scoot back if it starts to rain,”
warned Ellen. “_You_ can’t monkey with colds the way some kids can.”

“Why can’t I?” Emily asked rather indignantly. Why must _she_ be
debarred from “monkeying with colds” if other children could? It wasn’t
fair.

But Ellen only grunted. Emily muttered under her breath for her own
satisfaction, “You are a fat old thing of no importance!” and slipped
upstairs to get her hood--rather reluctantly, for she loved to run
bareheaded. She put the faded blue hood on over her long, heavy braid
of glossy, jet-black hair, and smiled chummily at her reflection in the
little greenish glass. The smile began at the corners of her lips and
spread over her face in a slow, subtle, very wonderful way, as Douglas
Starr often thought. It was her dead mother’s smile--the thing that had
caught and held him long ago when he had first seen Juliet Murray. It
seemed to be Emily’s only physical inheritance from her mother. In all
else, he thought, she was like the Starrs--in her large, purplish-grey
eyes with their very long lashes and black brows, in her high, white
forehead--too high for beauty--in the delicate modeling of her pale
oval face and sensitive mouth, in the little ears that were pointed
just a wee bit to show that she was kin to tribes of elfland.

“I’m going for a walk with the Wind Woman, dear,” said Emily. “I wish
I could take you too. Do you _ever_ get out of that room, I wonder.
The Wind Woman is going to be out in the fields to-night. She is tall
and misty, with thin, grey, silky clothes blowing all about her--and
wings like a bat’s--only you can see through them--and shining eyes
like stars looking through her long, loose hair. She can fly--but
to-night she will walk with me all over the fields. She’s a _great_
friend of mine--the Wind Woman is. I’ve known her ever since I was six.
We’re _old, old_ friends--but not quite so old as you and I, little
Emily-in-the-glass. We’ve been friends _always_, haven’t we?”

With a blown kiss to little Emily-in-the-glass, Emily-out-of-the-glass
was off.

The Wind Woman was waiting for her outside--ruffling the little spears
of striped grass that were sticking up stiffly in the bed under the
sitting-room window--tossing the big boughs of Adam-and-Eve--whispering
among the misty green branches of the birches--teasing the “Rooster
Pine” behind the house--it really did look like an enormous,
ridiculous rooster, with a huge, bunchy tail and a head thrown back to
crow.

It was so long since Emily had been out for a walk that she was half
crazy with the joy of it. The winter had been so stormy and the snow
so deep that she was never allowed out; April had been a month of rain
and wind; so on this May evening she felt like a released prisoner.
Where should she go? Down the brook--or over the fields to the spruce
barrens? Emily chose the latter.

She loved the spruce barrens, away at the further end of the long,
sloping pasture. That was a place where magic was made. She came more
fully into her fairy birthright there than in any other place. Nobody
who saw Emily skimming over the bare field would have envied her.
She was little and pale and poorly clad; sometimes she shivered in
her thin jacket; yet a queen might have gladly given a crown for her
visions--her dreams of wonder. The brown, frosted grasses under her
feet were velvet piles. The old, mossy, gnarled half-dead spruce-tree,
under which she paused for a moment to look up into the sky, was a
marble column in a palace of the gods; the far dusky hills were the
ramparts of a city of wonder. And for companions she had all the
fairies of the countryside--for she could believe in them here--the
fairies of the white clover and satin catkins, the little green folk of
the grass, the elves of the young fir-trees, sprites of wind and wild
fern and thistledown. Anything might happen there--everything might
come true.

And the barrens were such a splendid place in which to play hide and
seek with the Wind Woman. She was so very _real_ there; if you could
just spring quickly enough around a little cluster of spruces--only
you never could--you would _see_ her as well as feel her and hear her.
There she was--that _was_ the sweep of her grey cloak--no, she was
laughing up in the very top of the taller trees--and the chase was on
again--till, all at once, it seemed as if the Wind Woman were gone--and
the evening was bathed in a wonderful silence--and there was a sudden
rift in the curdled clouds westward, and a lovely, pale, pinky-green
lake of sky with a new moon in it.

Emily stood and looked at it with clasped hands and her little black
head upturned. She must go home and write down a description of it in
the yellow account book, where the last thing written had been, “Mike’s
Biograffy.” It would hurt her with its beauty until she wrote it down.
Then she would read it to Father. She must not forget how the tips of
the trees on the hill came out like fine black lace across the edge of
the pinky-green sky.

And then, for one glorious, supreme moment, came “the flash.”

Emily called it that, although she felt that the name didn’t exactly
describe it. It couldn’t be described--not even to Father, who always
seemed a little puzzled by it. Emily never spoke of it to any one else.

It had always seemed to Emily, ever since she could remember, that she
was very, very near to a world of wonderful beauty. Between it and
herself hung only a thin curtain; she could never draw the curtain
aside--but sometimes, just for a moment, a wind fluttered it and then
it was as if she caught a glimpse of the enchanting realm beyond--only
a glimpse--and heard a note of unearthly music.

This moment came rarely--went swiftly, leaving her breathless with the
inexpressible delight of it. She could never recall it--never summon
it--never pretend it; but the wonder of it stayed with her for days.
It never came twice with the same thing. To-night the dark boughs
against that far-off sky had given it. It had come with a high, wild
note of wind in the night, with a shadow wave over a ripe field, with a
greybird lighting on her window-sill in a storm, with the singing of
“Holy, holy, holy” in church, with a glimpse of the kitchen fire when
she had come home on a dark autumn night, with the spirit-like blue of
ice palms on a twilit pane, with a felicitous new word when she was
writing down a “description” of something. And always when the flash
came to her Emily felt that life was a wonderful, mysterious thing of
persistent beauty.

She scuttled back to the house in the hollow, through the gathering
twilight, all agog to get home and write down her “description” before
the memory picture of what she had seen grew a little blurred. She knew
just how she would begin it--the sentence seemed to shape itself in her
mind: “The hill called to me and something in me called back to it.”

She found Ellen Greene waiting for her on the sunken front-doorstep.
Emily was so full of happiness that she loved everything at that
moment, even fat things of no importance. She flung her arms around
Ellen’s knees and hugged them. Ellen looked down gloomily into the rapt
little face, where excitement had kindled a faint wild-rose flush, and
said, with a ponderous sigh:

“Do you know that your pa has only a week or two more to live?”




CHAPTER II

A WATCH IN THE NIGHT


Emily stood quite still and looked up at Ellen’s broad, red face--as
still as if she had been suddenly turned to stone. She felt as if she
had. She was as stunned as if Ellen had struck her a physical blow. The
colour faded out of her little face and her pupils dilated until they
swallowed up the irides and turned her eyes into pools of blackness.
The effect was so startling that even Ellen Greene felt uncomfortable.

“I’m telling you this because I think it’s high time you was told,”
she said. “I’ve been at your pa for months to tell you, but he’s kept
putting it off and off. I says to him, says I, ‘You know how hard she
takes things, and if you drop off suddent some day it’ll most kill
her if she hasn’t been prepared. It’s your duty to prepare her,’ and
he says, says he, ‘There’s time enough yet, Ellen.’ But he’s never
said a word, and when the doctor told me last night that the end might
come any time now, I just made up my mind that _I_’d do what was right
and drop a hint to prepare you. Laws-a-massy, child, don’t look like
that! You’ll be looked after. Your ma’s people will see to that--on
account of the Murray pride, if for no other reason. They won’t let
one of their own blood starve or go to strangers--even if they have
always hated your pa like p’isen. You’ll have a good home--better’n
you’ve ever had here. You needn’t worry a mite. As for your pa, you
ought to be thankful to see him at rest. He’s been dying by inches
for the last five years. He’s kept it from you, but he’s been a great
sufferer. Folks say his heart broke when your ma died--it came on him
so suddent-like--she was only sick three days. That’s why I want you to
know what’s coming, so’s you won’t be all upset when it happens. For
mercy’s sake, Emily Byrd Starr, don’t stand there staring like that!
You give me the creeps! You ain’t the first child that’s been left an
orphan and you won’t be the last. Try and be sensible. And don’t go
pestering your pa about what I’ve told you, mind that. Come you in now,
out of the damp, and I’ll give you a cooky ’fore you go to bed.”

Ellen stepped down as if to take the child’s hand. The power of motion
returned to Emily--she must scream if Ellen even touched her _now_.
With one sudden, sharp, bitter little cry she avoided Ellen’s hand,
darted through the door and fled up the dark staircase.

Ellen shook her head and waddled back to her kitchen.

“Anyhow, I’ve done _my_ duty,” she reflected. “He’d have just kept
saying ‘time enough’ and put it off till he was dead and then there’d
have been no managing her. She’ll have time now to get used to it,
and she’ll brace up in a day or two. I will say for her she’s got
spunk--which is lucky, from all I’ve heard of the Murrays. They won’t
find it easy to overcrow _her_. She’s got a streak of their pride, too,
and that’ll help her through. I wish I dared send some of the Murrays
word that he’s dying, but I don’t dast go that far. There’s no telling
what _he_’d do. Well, I’ve stuck on here to the last and I ain’t sorry.
Not many women would ’a’ done it, living as they do here. It’s a shame
the way that child’s been brought up--never even sent to school. Well,
I’ve told him often enough what I’ve thought of it--it ain’t on _my_
conscience, that’s one comfort. Here, you Sal-thing, you git out!
Where’s Mike, too?”

Ellen could not find Mike for the very good reason that he was upstairs
with Emily, held tightly in her arms, as she sat in the darkness on
her little cot bed. Amid her agony and desolation there was a certain
comfort in the feel of his soft fur and round velvety head.

Emily was not crying; she stared straight into the darkness, trying
to face the awful thing Ellen had told her. She did not doubt
it--something told her it was true. Why couldn’t she die, too? She
couldn’t go on living without Father.

“If I was God I wouldn’t let things like this happen,” she said.

She felt it was very wicked of her to say such a thing--Ellen had told
her once that it was the wickedest thing any one could do to find fault
with God. But she didn’t care. Perhaps if she were wicked enough God
would strike her dead and then she and Father could keep on being
together.

But nothing happened--only Mike got tired of being held so tightly
and squirmed away. She was all alone now, with this terrible burning
pain that seemed all over her and yet was not of the body. She could
never get rid of it. She couldn’t help it by writing about it in the
old yellow account book. She had written there about her Sunday School
teacher going away, and of being hungry when she went to bed, and Ellen
telling her she must be half crazy to talk of Wind Women and flashes;
and after she had written down all about them these things hadn’t hurt
her any more. But this couldn’t be written about. She could not even
go to Father for comfort, as she had gone when she burned her hand so
badly, picking up the red-hot poker by mistake. Father had held her in
his arms all that night and told her stories and helped her to bear the
pain. But Father, so Ellen had said, was going to die in a week or two.
Emily felt as if Ellen had told her this years and years ago. It surely
couldn’t be less than an hour since she had been playing with the Wind
Woman in the barrens and looking at the new moon in the pinky-green sky.

“The flash will never come again--it can’t,” she thought.

But Emily had inherited certain things from her fine old ancestors--the
power to fight--to suffer--to pity--to love very deeply--to rejoice--to
endure. These things were all in her and looked out at you through her
purplish-grey eyes. Her heritage of endurance came to her aid now and
bore her up. She must not let Father know what Ellen had told her--it
might hurt him. She must keep it all to herself and _love_ Father, oh,
so much, in the little while she could yet have him.

She heard him cough in the room below: she must be in bed when he came
up; she undressed as swiftly as her cold fingers permitted and crept
into the little cot bed which stood across the open window. The voices
of the gentle spring night called to her all unheeded--unheard the Wind
Woman whistled by the eaves. For the fairies dwell only in the kingdom
of Happiness; having no souls they cannot enter the kingdom of Sorrow.

She lay there cold and tearless and motionless when her father came
into the room. How very slowly he walked--how very slowly he took off
his clothes. How was it she had never noticed these things before? But
he was not coughing at all. Oh, what if Ellen were mistaken?--what
if--a wild hope shot through her aching heart. She gave a little gasp.

Douglas Starr came over to her bed. She felt his dear nearness as
he sat down on the chair beside her, in his old red dressing-gown.
Oh, how she loved him! There was no other Father like him in all the
world--there never could have been--so tender, so understanding, so
wonderful! They had always been such chums--they had loved each other
so much--it couldn’t be that they were to be separated.

“Winkums, are you asleep?”

“No,” whispered Emily.

“Are you sleepy, small dear?”

“No--no--not sleepy.”

Douglas Starr took her hand and held it tightly.

“Then we’ll have our talk, honey. I can’t sleep either. I want to tell
you something.”

“Oh--I know it--I know it!” burst out Emily. “Oh, Father, I know it!
Ellen told me.”

Douglas Starr was silent for a moment. Then he said under his breath,
“The old fool--the _fat_ old fool!”--as if Ellen’s fatness was an
added aggravation of her folly. Again, for the last time, Emily hoped.
Perhaps it was all a dreadful mistake--just some more of Ellen’s fat
foolishness.

“It--it isn’t true, is it, Father?” she whispered.

“Emily, child,” said her father, “I can’t lift you up--I haven’t the
strength--but climb up and sit on my knee--in the old way.”

Emily slipped out of bed and got on her father’s knee. He wrapped the
old dressing-gown about her and held her close with his face against
hers.

“Dear little child--little beloved Emilykin, it is quite true,” he
said, “I meant to tell you myself to-night. And now that old absurdity
of an Ellen has told you--brutally, I suppose--and hurt you dreadfully.
She has the brain of a hen and the sensibility of a cow. May jackals
sit on her grandmother’s grave! _I_ wouldn’t have hurt you, dear.”

Emily fought something down that wanted to choke her.

“Father, I can’t--I can’t bear it.”

“Yes, you can and will. You will live because there is something for
you to do, I think. You have my gift--along with something I never
had. You will succeed where I failed, Emily. I haven’t been able to do
much for you, sweetheart, but I’ve done what I could. I’ve taught you
something, I think--in spite of Ellen Greene. Emily, do you remember
your mother?”

“Just a little--here and there--like lovely bits of dreams.”

“You were only four when she died. I’ve never talked much to you about
her--I couldn’t. But I’m going to tell you all about her to-night. It
doesn’t hurt me to talk of her now--I’ll see her so soon again. You
don’t look like her, Emily--only when you smile. For the rest, you’re
like your namesake, my mother. When you were born I wanted to call you
Juliet, too. But your mother wouldn’t. She said if we called you Juliet
then I’d soon take to calling her ‘Mother’ to distinguish between you,
and she couldn’t endure _that_. She said her Aunt Nancy had once said
to her, ‘The first time your husband calls you “Mother” the romance of
life is over.’ So we called you after my mother--_her_ maiden name
was Emily Byrd. Your mother thought Emily the prettiest name in the
world,--it was quaint and arch and delightful, she said. Emily, your
mother was the sweetest woman ever made.”

His voice trembled and Emily snuggled close.

“I met her twelve years ago, when I was sub-editor of the _Enterprise_
up in Charlottetown and she was in her last year at Queen’s. She was
tall and fair and blue-eyed. She looked a little like your Aunt Laura,
but Laura was never so pretty. Their eyes were very much alike--and
their voices. She was one of the Murrays from Blair Water. I’ve never
told you much about your mother’s people, Emily. They live up on the
old north shore at Blair Water on New Moon Farm--always have lived
there since the first Murray came out from the Old Country in 1790. The
ship he came on was called the _New Moon_ and he named his farm after
her.”

“It’s a nice name--the new moon is such a pretty thing,” said Emily,
interested for a moment.

“There’s been a Murray ever since at New Moon Farm. They’re a proud
family--the Murray pride is a byword along the north shore, Emily.
Well, they had some things to be proud of, that cannot be denied--but
they carried it too far. Folks call them ‘the chosen people’ up there.

“They increased and multiplied and scattered all over, but the old
stock at New Moon Farm is pretty well run out. Only your Aunts,
Elizabeth and Laura, live there now, and their cousin, Jimmy Murray.
They never married--could not find any one good enough for a Murray, so
it used to be said. Your Uncle Oliver and your Uncle Wallace live in
Summerside, your Aunt Ruth in Shrewsbury and your Great-Aunt Nancy at
Priest Pond.”

“Priest Pond--that’s an _interesting_ name--not a pretty name like New
Moon and Blair Water--but interesting,” said Emily. Feeling Father’s
arm around her the horror had momentarily shrunk away. For just a
little while she ceased to believe it.

Douglas Starr tucked the dressing-gown a little more closely around
her, kissed her black head, and went on.

“Elizabeth and Laura and Wallace and Oliver and Ruth were old Archibald
Murray’s children. His first wife was their mother. When he was sixty
he married again--a young slip of a girl--who died when your mother
was born. Juliet was twenty years younger than her half-family, as she
used to call them. She was very pretty and charming and they all loved
and petted her and were very proud of her. When she fell in love with
me, a poor young journalist, with nothing in the world but his pen and
his ambition, there was a family earthquake. The Murray pride couldn’t
tolerate the thing at all. I won’t rake it all up--but things were said
I could never forget or forgive. Your mother married me, Emily--and the
New Moon people would have nothing more to do with her. Can you believe
that, in spite of it, she was never sorry for marrying me?”

Emily put up her hand and patted her father’s hollow cheek.

“_Of course_ she wouldn’t be sorry. _Of course_ she’d rather have you
than all the Murrays of any kind of a moon.”

Father laughed a little--and there was just a note of triumph in his
laugh.

“Yes, she seemed to feel that way about it. And we were so happy--oh,
Emilykin, there never were two happier people in the world. You were
the child of that happiness. I remember the night you were born in
the little house in Charlottetown. It was in May and a west wind was
blowing silvery clouds over the moon. There was a star or two here
and there. In our tiny garden--everything we had was small except our
love and our happiness--it was dark and blossomy. I walked up and
down the path between the beds of violets your mother had planted--and
prayed. The pale east was just beginning to glow like a rosy pearl
when some one came and told me I had a little daughter. I went
in--and your mother, white and weak, smiled just that dear, slow,
wonderful smile I loved, and said, ‘We’ve--got--the only--baby--of any
importance--in--the world, dear. Just--think--of that!’”

“I wish people could remember from the very moment they’re born,” said
Emily. “It would be so very interesting.”

“I dare say we’d have a lot of uncomfortable memories,” said her
father, laughing a little. “It can’t be very pleasant getting used to
living--no pleasanter than getting used to stopping it. But you didn’t
seem to find it hard, for you were a good wee kidlet, Emily. We had
four more happy years and then--do you remember the time your mother
died, Emily?”

“I remember the funeral, Father--I remember it _distinctly_. You were
standing in the middle of a room, holding me in your arms, and Mother
was lying just before us in a long, black box. And you were crying--and
I couldn’t think why--and I wondered why Mother looked so white and
wouldn’t open her eyes. And I leaned down and touched her cheek--and
oh, it was so cold. It made me shiver. And somebody in the room said,
‘Poor little thing!’ and I was frightened and put my face down on your
shoulder.”

“Yes, I recall that. Your mother died very suddenly. I don’t think
we’ll talk about it. The Murrays all came to her funeral. The Murrays
have certain traditions and they live up to them very strictly. One
of them is that nothing but candles shall be burned for light at New
Moon--and another is that no quarrel must be carried past the grave.
They came when she was dead--they would have come when she was ill if
they had known, I will say that much for them. And they behaved very
well--oh, very well indeed. They were not the Murrays of New Moon for
nothing. Your Aunt Elizabeth wore her best black satin dress to the
funeral. For any funeral but a Murray’s the second best one would
have done; and they made no serious objection when I said your mother
would be buried in the Starr plot in Charlottetown cemetery. They
would have liked to take her back to the old Murray burying-ground in
Blair Water--they had their own private burying-ground, you know--no
indiscriminate graveyard for _them_. But your Uncle Wallace handsomely
admitted that a woman should belong to her husband’s family in death as
in life. And then they offered to take you and bring you up--to ‘give
you your mother’s place.’ I refused to let them have you--then. Did I
do right, Emily?”

“Yes--yes--yes!” whispered Emily, with a hug at every “yes.”

“I told Oliver Murray--it was he who spoke to me about you--that as
long as I lived I would not be parted from my child. He said, ‘If you
ever change your mind, let us know.’ But I did not change my mind--not
even three years later when my doctor told me I must give up work.
‘If you don’t, I give you a year,’ he said, ‘if you do, and live
out-of-doors all you can, I give you three--or possibly four.’ He was a
good prophet. I came out here and we’ve had four lovely years together,
haven’t we, small dear one?”

“Yes--oh, yes!”

“Those years and what I’ve taught you in them are the only legacy I
can leave you, Emily. We’ve been living on a tiny income I have from
a life interest that was left me in an old uncle’s estate--an uncle
who died before I was married. The estate goes to a charity now, and
this little house is only a rented one. From a worldly point of view
I’ve certainly been a failure. But your mother’s people will care for
you--I know that. The Murray pride will guarantee so much, if nothing
else. And they can’t help loving you. Perhaps I should have sent for
them before--perhaps I ought to do it yet. But I have pride of a kind,
too--the Starrs are not entirely traditionless--and the Murrays said
some very bitter things to me when I married your mother. Will I send
to New Moon and ask them to come, Emily?”

“No!” said Emily, almost fiercely.

She did not want any one to come between her and Father for the few
precious days left. The thought was horrible to her. It would be bad
enough if they had to come--afterwards. But she would not mind anything
much--then.

“We’ll stay together to the very end, then, little Emily-child. We
won’t be parted for a minute. And I want you to be brave. You mustn’t
be afraid of _anything_, Emily. Death isn’t terrible. The universe is
full of love--and spring comes everywhere--and in death you open and
shut a door. There are beautiful things on the other side of the door.
I’ll find your mother there--I’ve doubted many things, but I’ve never
doubted _that_. Sometimes I’ve been afraid that she would get so far
ahead of me in the ways of eternity that I’d never catch up. But I
feel _now_ that she’s waiting for me. And we’ll wait for you--we won’t
hurry--we’ll loiter and linger till you catch up with us.”

“I wish you--could take me right through the door with you,” whispered
Emily.

“After a little while you won’t wish that. You have yet to learn how
kind time is. And life has something for you--I feel it. Go forward to
meet it fearlessly, dear. I know you don’t feel like that just now--but
you will remember my words by and by.”

“I feel just now,” said Emily, who couldn’t bear to hide anything from
Father, “that I don’t like God any more.”

Douglas Starr laughed--the laugh Emily liked best. It was such a dear
laugh--she caught her breath over the dearness of it. She felt his
arms tightening round her.

“Yes, you do, honey. You can’t help liking God. He is Love itself, you
know. You mustn’t mix Him up with Ellen Greene’s God, of course.”

Emily didn’t know exactly what Father meant. But all at once she found
that she wasn’t afraid any longer--and the bitterness had gone out of
her sorrow, and the unbearable pain out of her heart. She felt as if
love was all about her and around her, breathed out from some great,
invisible, hovering Tenderness. One couldn’t be afraid or bitter
where love was--and love was everywhere. Father was going through the
door--no, he was going to lift a curtain--she liked _that_ thought
better, because a curtain wasn’t as hard and fast as a door--and he
would slip into that world of which the flash had given her glimpses.
He would be there in its beauty--never very far away from her. She
could bear anything if she could only feel that Father wasn’t very far
away from her--just beyond that wavering curtain.

Douglas Starr held her until she fell asleep; and then in spite of his
weakness he managed to lay her down in her little bed.

“She will love deeply--she will suffer terribly--she will have glorious
moments to compensate--as I have had. As her mother’s people deal with
her, so may God deal with them,” he murmured brokenly.




CHAPTER III

A HOP OUT OF KIN


Douglas Starr lived two weeks more. In after years when the pain
had gone out of their recollection, Emily thought they were the
most precious of her memories. They were beautiful weeks--beautiful
and not sad. And one night, when he was lying on the couch in the
sitting-room, with Emily beside him in the old wing-chair, he went past
the curtain--went so quietly and easily that Emily did not know he was
gone until she suddenly felt the strange _stillness_ of the room--there
was no breathing in it but her own.

“Father--Father!” she cried. Then she screamed for Ellen.

Ellen Greene told the Murrays when they came that Emily had behaved
real well, when you took everything into account. To be sure, she had
cried all night and hadn’t slept a wink; none of the Maywood people who
came flocking kindly in to help could comfort her; but when morning
came her tears were all shed. She was pale and quiet and docile.

“That’s right, now,” said Ellen, “that’s what comes of being properly
prepared. Your pa was so mad at me for warning you that he wasn’t
rightly civil to me since--and him a dying man. But I don’t hold any
grudge against him. _I_ did my duty. Mrs. Hubbard’s fixing up a black
dress for you and it’ll be ready by supper time. Your ma’s people will
be here tonight, so they’ve telegraphed, and I’m bound they’ll find you
looking respectable. They’re well off and they’ll provide for you. Your
pa hasn’t left a cent but there ain’t any debts, I’ll say _that_ for
him. Have you been in to see the body?”

“Don’t call him _that_,” cried Emily, wincing. It was horrible to hear
Father called _that_.

“Why not? If you ain’t the queerest child! He makes a better looking
corpse than I thought he would, what with being so wasted and all. He
was always a pretty man, though too thin.”

“Ellen Greene,” said Emily suddenly, “if you say any more of--those
things--about Father, I will put the black curse on you!”

Ellen Greene stared.

“I don’t know what on earth you mean. But that’s no way to talk to me,
after all I’ve done for you. You’d better not let the Murrays hear you
talking like that or they won’t want much to do with you. The black
curse indeed! Well, here’s gratitude!”

Emily’s eyes smarted. She was just a lonely, solitary little creature
and she felt very friendless. But she was not at all remorseful for
what she had said to Ellen and she was not going to pretend she was.

“Come you here and help me wash these dishes,” ordered Ellen. “It’ll
do you good to have something to take up your mind and then you won’t
be after putting curses on people who have worked their fingers to the
bone for you.”

Emily, with an eloquent glance at Ellen’s hands, went and got the dish
towel.

“Your hands are fat and pudgy,” she said. “The bones don’t show at all.”

“Never mind sassing back! It’s awful, with your poor pa dead in there.
But if your Aunt Ruth takes you she’ll soon cure you of that.”

“Is Aunt Ruth going to take me?”

“I don’t know, but she ought to. She’s a widow with no chick or child,
and well-to-do.”

“I don’t think I want Aunt Ruth to take me,” said Emily deliberately,
after a moment’s reflection.

“Well, _you_ won’t have the choosing likely. You ought to be thankful
to get a home anywhere. Remember you’re not of much importance.”

“I am important to myself,” cried Emily proudly.

“It’ll be some chore to bring _you_ up,” muttered Ellen. “Your Aunt
Ruth is the one to do it, in my opinion. _She_ won’t stand no nonsense.
A fine woman she is and the neatest housekeeper on P. E. Island. You
could eat off her floor.”

“I don’t want to eat off her floor. I don’t care if a floor is dirty as
long as the tablecloth is clean.”

“Well, her tablecloths are clean too, I reckon. She’s got an elegant
house in Shrewsbury with bow windows and wooden lace all round the
roof. It’s very stylish. It would be a fine home for you. She’d learn
you some sense and do you a world of good.”

“I don’t want to learn sense and be done a world of good to,” cried
Emily with a quivering lip. “I--I want somebody to love me.”

“Well, you’ve got to behave yourself if you want people to like you.
You’re not to blame so much--your pa has spoiled you. I told him so
often enough, but he just laughed. I hope he ain’t sorry for it now.
The fact is, Emily Starr, you’re queer, and folks don’t care for queer
children.”

“How am I queer?” demanded Emily.

“You talk queer--and you act queer--and at times you look queer.
And you’re too old for your age--though that ain’t _your_ fault. It
comes of never mixing with other children. I’ve always threaped at
your father to send you to school--learning at home ain’t the same
thing--but he wouldn’t listen to me, of course. I don’t say but what
you are as far along in book learning as you need to be, but what you
want is to learn how to be like other children. In one way it would
be a good thing if your Uncle Oliver would take you, for he’s got a
big family. But he’s not as well off as the rest, so it ain’t likely
he will. Your Uncle Wallace might, seeing as he reckons himself the
head of the family. He’s only got a grown-up daughter. But his wife’s
delicate--or fancies she is.”

“I wish Aunt Laura would take me,” said Emily. She remembered that
Father had said Aunt Laura was something like her mother.

“Aunt Laura! _She_ won’t have no say in it--Elizabeth’s boss at New
Moon. Jimmy Murray runs the farm, but he ain’t quite all there, I’m
told--”

“What part of him isn’t there?” asked Emily curiously.

“Laws, it’s something about his mind, child. He’s a bit simple--some
accident or other when he was a youngster, I’ve heard. It addled his
head, kind of. Elizabeth was mixed up in it some way--I’ve never heard
the rights of it. I don’t reckon the New Moon people will want to be
bothered with you. They’re awful set in their ways. You take my advice
and try to please your Aunt Ruth. Be polite--and well-behaved--mebbe
she’ll take a fancy to you. There, that’s all the dishes. You’d better
go upstairs and be out of the way.”

“Can I take Mike and Saucy Sal?” asked Emily.

“No, you can’t.”

“They’d be company for me,” pleaded Emily.

“Company or no company, you can’t have them. They’re outside and
they’ll stay outside. I ain’t going to have them tracking all over the
house. The floor’s been scrubbed.”

“Why didn’t you scrub the floor when Father was alive?” asked Emily.
“He liked things to be clean. You hardly ever scrubbed it then. Why do
you do it now?”

“Listen to her! Was I to be always scrubbing floors with my rheumatiz?
Get off upstairs and you’d better lie down awhile.”

“I’m going upstairs, but I’m not going to lie down,” said Emily. “I’ve
got a lot of thinking to do.”

“There’s one thing I’d advise you to do,” said Ellen, determined to
lose no chance of doing her duty, “and that is to kneel down and pray
to God to make you a good and respectful and grateful child.”

Emily paused at the foot of the stairs and looked back.

“Father said I wasn’t to have anything to do with your God,” she said
gravely.

Ellen gasped foolishly, but could not think of any reply to this
heathenish statement. She appealed to the universe.

“Did any one ever hear the like!”

“I know what _your_ God is like,” said Emily. “I saw His picture in
that Adam-and-Eve book of yours. He has whiskers and wears a nightgown.
I don’t like Him. But I like Father’s God.”

“And what is your father’s God like, if I may ask?” demanded Ellen
sarcastically.

Emily hadn’t any idea what Father’s God was like, but she was
determined not to be posed by Ellen.

“He is clear as the moon, fair as the sun, and terrible as an army with
banners,” she said triumphantly.

“Well, you’re bound to have the last word, but the Murrays will teach
you what’s what,” said Ellen, giving up the argument. “They’re strict
Presbyterians and won’t hold by any of your father’s awful notions. Get
off upstairs.”

Emily went up to the south room, feeling very desolate.

“There isn’t anybody in the world who loves me now,” she said, as
she curled up on her bed by the window. But she was determined she
would not cry. The Murrays, who had hated her father, should not see
her crying. She felt that she detested them all--except perhaps Aunt
Laura. How very big and empty the world had suddenly become. Nothing
was interesting any more. It did not matter that the little squat
apple-tree between Adam-and-Eve had become a thing of rose-and-snow
beauty--that the hills beyond the hollow were of green silk,
purple-misted--that the daffodils were out in the garden--that the
birches were hung all over with golden tassels--that the Wind Woman was
blowing white young clouds across the sky. None of these things had any
charm or consolation for her now. In her inexperience she believed they
never would have again.

“But I promised Father I’d be brave,” she whispered, clenching her
little fists, “and I will. And I _won’t_ let the Murrays see I’m afraid
of them--I won’t _be_ afraid of them!”

When the far-off whistle of the afternoon train blew beyond the hills,
Emily’s heart began to beat. She clasped her hands and lifted her face.

“Please help me, Father’s God--_not_ Ellen’s God,” she said. “Help me
to be brave and not cry before the Murrays.”

Soon after there was the sound of wheels below--and voices--loud,
decided voices. Then Ellen came puffing up the stairs with the black
dress--a sleazy thing of cheap merino.

“Mrs. Hubbard just got it done in time, thanks be. I wouldn’t ’a’
had the Murrays see you not in black for the world. They can’t say I
haven’t done my duty. They’re all here--the New Moon people and Oliver
and his wife, your Aunt Addie, and Wallace and his wife, your Aunt Eva,
and Aunt Ruth--Mrs. Dutton, _her_ name is. There, you’re ready now.
Come along.”

“Can’t I put my Venetian beads on?” asked Emily.

“Did ever any mortal! Venetian beads with a mourning dress! Shame on
you! Is this a time to be thinking of vanity?”

“It isn’t vanity!” cried Emily. “Father gave me those beads last
Christmas--and I want to show the Murrays that I’ve got _something_!”

“No more of your nonsense! Come along, I say! Mind your
manners--there’s a good deal depends on the impression you make on
them.”

Emily walked rigidly downstairs before Ellen and into the parlour.
Eight people were sitting around it--and she instantly felt the
critical gaze of sixteen stranger eyes. She looked very pale and plain
in her black dress; the purple shadows left by weeping made her large
eyes look too large and hollow. She was desperately afraid, and she
knew it--but she would not let the Murrays see it. She held up her head
and faced the ordeal before her gallantly.

“This,” said Ellen, turning her around by the shoulder, “is your Uncle
Wallace.”

Emily shuddered and put out a cold hand. She did not like Uncle
Wallace--she knew that at once--he was black and grim and ugly, with
frowning, bristly brows and a stern, unpitying mouth. He had big
pouches under his eyes, and carefully-trimmed black side-whiskers.
Emily decided then and there that she did not admire side-whiskers.

“How do you do, Emily?” he said coldly--and just as coldly he bent
forward and kissed her cheek.

A sudden wave of indignation swept over Emily’s soul. How _dared_ he
kiss her--he had hated her father and disowned her mother! She would
have none of his kisses! Flash-quick, she snatched her handkerchief
from her pocket and wiped her outraged cheek.

“Well--_well_!” exclaimed a disagreeable voice from the other side of
the room.

Uncle Wallace looked as if he would like to say a great many things but
couldn’t think of them. Ellen, with a grunt of despair, propelled Emily
to the next sitter.

“Your Aunt Eva,” she said.

Aunt Eva was sitting huddled up in a shawl. She had the fretful face
of the imaginary invalid. She shook hands with Emily and said nothing.
Neither did Emily.

“Your Uncle Oliver,” announced Ellen.

Emily rather liked Uncle Oliver’s appearance. He was big and fat and
rosy and jolly-looking. She thought she would not mind so much if _he_
kissed her, in spite of his bristly white moustache. But Uncle Oliver
had learned Uncle Wallace’s lesson.

“I’ll give you a quarter for a kiss,” he whispered genially. A joke was
Uncle Oliver’s idea of being kind and sympathetic, but Emily did not
know this, and resented it.

“I don’t _sell_ my kisses,” she said, lifting her head as haughtily as
any Murray of them all could do.

Uncle Oliver chuckled and seemed infinitely amused and not a bit
offended. But Emily heard a sniff across the room.

Aunt Addie was next. She was as fat and rosy and jolly-looking as her
husband and she gave Emily’s cold hand a nice, gentle squeeze.

“How are you, dear?” she said.

That “dear” touched Emily and thawed her a trifle. But the next in
turn froze her up instantly again. It was Aunt Ruth--Emily knew it was
Aunt Ruth before Ellen said so, and she knew it was Aunt Ruth who had
“well--welled” and sniffed. She knew the cold, grey eyes, the prim, dull
brown hair, the short, stout figure, the thin, pinched, merciless mouth.

Aunt Ruth held out the tips of her fingers, but Emily did not take them.

“Shake hands with your Aunt,” said Ellen in an angry whisper.

“She does not want to shake hands with me,” said Emily, distinctly,
“and so I am not going to do it.”

Aunt Ruth folded her scorned hands back on her black silk lap.

“You are a very ill-bred child,” she said; “but of course it was only
what was to be expected.”

Emily felt a sudden compunction. Had she cast a reflection on her
father by her behaviour? Perhaps after all she should have shaken hands
with Aunt Ruth. But it was too late now--Ellen had already jerked her
on.

“This is your Cousin, Mr. James Murray,” said Ellen, in the disgusted
tone of one who gives up something as a bad job and is only anxious to
be done with it.

“Cousin Jimmy--Cousin Jimmy,” said that individual. Emily looked
steadily at him, and liked him at once without any reservations.

He had a little, rosy, elfish face with a forked grey beard; his hair
curled over his head in a most un-Murray-like mop of glossy brown; and
his large, brown eyes were as kind and frank as a child’s. He gave
Emily a hearty handshake, though he looked askance at the lady across
from him while doing it.

“Hello, pussy!” he said.

Emily began to smile at him, but her smile was, as always, so slow in
developing that Ellen had whisked her on before it was in full flower,
and it was Aunt Laura who got the benefit of it. Aunt Laura started and
paled.

“Juliet’s smile!” she said, half under her breath. And again Aunt Ruth
sniffed.

Aunt Laura did not look like any one else in the room. She was almost
pretty, with her delicate features and the heavy coils of pale, sleek,
fair hair, faintly greyed, pinned closely all around her head. But it
was her eyes that won Emily. They were such round blue, _blue_ eyes.
One never quite got over the shock of their blueness. And when she
spoke it was in a beautiful, soft voice.

“You poor, dear, little child,” she said, and put her arm around Emily
for a gentle hug.

Emily returned the hug and had a narrow escape then from letting
the Murrays see her cry. All that saved her was the fact that Ellen
suddenly pushed her on into the corner by the window.

“And this is your Aunt Elizabeth.”

Yes, this was Aunt Elizabeth. No doubt about that--and she had on a
stiff, black satin dress, so stiff and rich that Emily felt sure it
must be her very best. This pleased Emily. Whatever Aunt Elizabeth
thought of her father, at least she had paid him the respect of her
best dress. And Aunt Elizabeth was quite fine looking in a tall,
thin, austere style, with clear-cut features and a massive coronet
of iron-grey hair under her black lace cap. But her eyes, though
steel-blue, were as cold as Aunt Ruth’s, and her long, thin mouth was
compressed severely. Under her cool, appraising glance Emily retreated
into herself and shut the door of her soul. She would have liked to
please Aunt Elizabeth--who was “boss” at New Moon--but she felt she
could not do it.

Aunt Elizabeth shook hands and said nothing--the truth being that she
did not know exactly what to say. Elizabeth Murray would not have felt
“put about” before King or Governor-General. The Murray pride would
have carried her through there; but she did feel disturbed in the
presence of this alien, level-gazing child who had already shown that
she was anything but meek and humble. Though Elizabeth Murray would
never have admitted it, she did not want to be snubbed as Wallace and
Ruth had been.

“Go and sit on the sofa,” ordered Ellen.

Emily sat on the sofa with her eyes cast down, a slight, black,
indomitable little figure. She folded her hands on her lap and crossed
her ankles. They should see she had manners.

Ellen had retreated to the kitchen, thanking her stars that _that_ was
over. Emily did not like Ellen but she felt deserted when Ellen had
gone. She was alone now before the bar of Murray opinion. She would
have given anything to be out of the room. Yet in the back of her mind
a design was forming of writing all about it in the old account book.
It would be interesting. She could describe them all--she knew she
could. She had the very word for Aunt Ruth’s eyes--“stone-grey.” They
were just like stones--as hard and cold and relentless. Then a pang
tore through her heart. Father could never again read what she wrote in
the account book.

Still--she felt that she would rather like to write it all out. How
could she best describe Aunt Laura’s eyes? They were such beautiful
eyes--just to call them “blue” meant nothing--hundreds of people had
blue eyes--oh, she had it--“wells of blue”--that was the very thing.

And then the flash came!

It was the first time since the dreadful night when Ellen had met her
on the doorstep. She had thought it could never come again--and now in
this most unlikely place and time it _had_ come--she had seen, with
other eyes than those of sense, the wonderful world behind the veil.
Courage and hope flooded her cold little soul like a wave of rosy
light. She lifted her head and looked about her undauntedly--“brazenly”
Aunt Ruth afterwards declared.

Yes, she _would_ write them all out in the account book--describe
every last one of them--sweet Aunt Laura, nice Cousin Jimmy, grim old
Uncle Wallace, and moon-faced Uncle Oliver, stately Aunt Elizabeth and
detestable Aunt Ruth.

“She’s a delicate-looking child,” said Aunt Eva, suddenly, in her
fretful, colourless voice.

“Well, what else could you expect?” said Aunt Addie, with a sigh that
seemed to Emily to hold some dire significance. “She’s too pale--if she
had a little colour she wouldn’t be bad-looking.”

“I don’t know who she looks like,” said Uncle Oliver, staring at Emily.

“She is not a Murray, that is plain to be seen,” said Aunt Elizabeth,
decidedly and disapprovingly.

“They are talking about me just as if I wasn’t here,” thought Emily,
her heart swelling with indignation over the indecency of it.

“I wouldn’t call her a Starr either,” said Uncle Oliver. “Seems to me
she’s more like the Byrds--she’s got her grandmother’s hair and eyes.”

“She’s got old George Byrd’s nose,” said Aunt Ruth, in a tone that left
no doubt as to her opinion of George’s nose.

“She’s got her father’s forehead,” said Aunt Eva, also disapprovingly.

“She has her mother’s smile,” said Aunt Laura, but in such a low tone
that nobody heard her.

“And Juliet’s long lashes--hadn’t Juliet very long lashes?” said Aunt
Addie.

Emily had reached the limit of her endurance.

“You make me feel as if I was made up of scraps and patches!” she burst
out indignantly.

The Murrays stared at her. Perhaps they felt some compunction--for,
after all, none of them were ogres and all were human, more or less.
Apparently nobody could think of anything to say, but the shocked
silence was broken by a chuckle from Cousin Jimmy--a low chuckle, full
of mirth and free from malice.

“That’s right, puss,” he said. “Stand up to them--take your own part.”

“Jimmy!” said Aunt Ruth.

Jimmy subsided.

Aunt Ruth looked at Emily.

“When I was a little girl,” she said, “I never spoke until I was spoken
to.”

“But if nobody ever spoke until they were spoken to there would be no
conversation,” said Emily argumentatively.

“I never answered back,” Aunt Ruth went on severely. “In those days
little girls were trained properly. We were polite and respectful to
our elders. We were taught our place and we kept it.”

“I don’t believe you ever had much fun,” said Emily--and then gasped in
horror. She hadn’t meant to say that out loud--she had only meant to
_think_ it. But she had such an old habit of thinking aloud to Father.

“Fun!” said Aunt Ruth, in a shocked tone. “I did not think of fun when
I was a little girl.”

“No, I know,” said Emily gravely. Her voice and manner were perfectly
respectful, for she was anxious to atone for her involuntary lapse.
Yet Aunt Ruth looked as if she would like to box her ears. This child
was _pitying_ her--insulting her by being sorry for _her_--because of
her prim, impeccable childhood. It was unendurable--especially in a
Starr. And that abominable Jimmy was chuckling again! Elizabeth should
suppress him!

Fortunately Ellen Greene appeared at this juncture and announced supper.

“You’ve got to wait,” she whispered to Emily. “There ain’t room for you
at the table.”

Emily was glad. She knew she could not eat a bite under the Murray
eyes. Her aunts and uncles filed out stiffly without looking at
her--all except Aunt Laura, who turned at the door and blew her a tiny,
furtive kiss. Before Emily could respond Ellen Greene had shut the door.

Emily was left all alone in the room that was filling with twilight
shadows. The pride that had sustained her in the presence of the
Murrays suddenly failed her and she knew that tears were coming. She
went straight to the closed door at the end of the parlour, opened
it, and went in. Her father’s coffin stood in the centre of the small
room which had been a bedroom. It was heaped with flowers--the Murrays
had done the proper thing in that as in all else. The great anchor of
white roses Uncle Wallace had brought stood up aggressively on the
small table at the head. Emily could not see her father’s face for Aunt
Ruth’s heavily-fragrant pillow of white hyacinths lying on the glass,
and she dared not move it. But she curled herself up on the floor and
laid her cheek against the polished side of the casket. They found her
there asleep when they came in after supper. Aunt Laura lifted her up
and said,

“I’m going to take the poor child up to bed--she’s worn right out.”

Emily opened her eyes and looked drowsily about her.

“Can I have Mike?” she said.

“Who is Mike?”

“My cat--my big grey cat.”

“A cat!” exclaimed Aunt Elizabeth in a shocked tone. “You must not have
a cat in your bedroom!”

“Why not--for once?” pleaded Laura.

“Certainly not!” said Aunt Elizabeth. “A cat is a most unwholesome
thing in a sleeping apartment. I’m surprised at you, Laura! Take the
child up to bed and see that there are plenty of bedclothes. It’s a
cold night--but let me hear no more talk of sleeping with cats.”

“Mike is a clean cat,” said Emily. “He washes himself--every day.”

“Take her up to bed, Laura!” said Aunt Elizabeth, ignoring Emily.

Aunt Laura yielded meekly. She carried Emily upstairs, helped her
undress, and tucked her into bed. Emily was very sleepy. But before
she was wholly asleep she felt something, soft and warm and purry and
companionable, snuggling down by her shoulder. Aunt Laura had sneaked
down, found Mike and brought him up to her. Aunt Elizabeth never knew
and Ellen Greene dared not say a word in protest--for was not Laura a
Murray of New Moon?




CHAPTER IV

A FAMILY CONCLAVE


Emily wakened at daylight the next morning. Through her low,
uncurtained window the splendour of the sunrise was coming in, and one
faint, white star was still lingering in the crystal-green sky over the
Rooster Pine. A fresh sweet wind of dawn was blowing around the eaves.
Ellen Greene was sleeping in the big bed and snoring soundly. Except
for that the little house was very still. It was the chance for which
Emily had waited.

Very carefully she slipped from her bed, tiptoed across the room and
opened the door. Mike uncoiled himself from the mat on the middle of
the floor and followed her, rubbing his warm sides against her chilly
little ankles. Almost guiltily she crept down the bare, dark staircase.
How the steps creaked--surely it would waken everybody! But nobody
appeared and Emily got down and slipped into the parlour, drawing a
long breath of relief as she closed the door. She almost ran across the
room to the other door.

Aunt Ruth’s floral pillow still covered the glass of the casket. Emily,
with a tightening of the lips that gave her face an odd resemblance to
Aunt Elizabeth, lifted up the pillow and set it on the floor.

“Oh, Father--Father!” she whispered, putting her hand to her throat to
keep something down. She stood there, a little shivering, white-clad
figure, and looked at her father. This was to be her good-bye; she must
say it when they were alone together--she would not say it before the
Murrays.

Father looked so beautiful. All the lines of pain had vanished--his
face looked almost like a boy’s except for the silver hair above it.
And he was smiling--such a nice, whimsical, wise little smile, as if he
had suddenly discovered something lovely and unexpected and surprising.
She had seen many nice smiles on his face in life but never one just
like this.

“Father, I didn’t cry before them,” she whispered. “I’m sure I didn’t
disgrace the Starrs. Not shaking hands with Aunt Ruth wasn’t disgracing
the Starrs, was it? Because she didn’t really want me to--oh, Father,
I don’t think any of them like me, unless perhaps Aunt Laura does a
little. And I’m going to cry a little bit now, Father, because I can’t
keep it back _all_ the time.”

She laid her face on the cold glass and sobbed bitterly but briefly.
She must say good-bye before any one found her. Raising her head she
looked long and earnestly at the beloved face.

“Good-bye, dearest darling,” she whispered chokingly.

Dashing away her blinding tears she replaced Aunt Ruth’s pillow, hiding
her father’s face from her forever. Then she slipped out, intent on
speedily regaining her room. At the door she almost fell over Cousin
Jimmy, who was sitting on a chair before it, swathed in a huge, checked
dressing-gown, and nursing Mike.

“S-s-h!” he whispered, patting her on the shoulder. “_I_ heard you
coming down and followed you. _I_ knew what you wanted. I’ve been
sitting here to keep them out if any of them came after you. Here, take
this and hurry back to your bed, small pussy.”

“This” was a roll of peppermint lozenges. Emily clutched it and fled,
overcome with shame at being seen by Cousin Jimmy in her nightgown.
She hated peppermints and never ate them, but the fact of Cousin Jimmy
Murray’s kindness in giving them to her sent a thrill of delight to her
heart. And he called her “small pussy,” too,--she liked that. She had
thought nobody would ever call her nice pet names again. Father had had
so many of them for her--“sweetheart” and “darling” and “Emily-child”
and “dear wee kidlet” and “honey” and “elfkin.” He had a pet name for
every mood and she had loved them all. As for Cousin Jimmy, he was
nice. Whatever part of him was missing it wasn’t his heart. She felt so
grateful to him that after she was safely in her bed again she forced
herself to eat one of the lozenges, though it took all her grit to
worry it down.

The funeral was held that forenoon. For once the lonesome little house
in the hollow was filled. The coffin was taken into the parlour and
the Murrays as mourners sat stiffly and decorously all round it, Emily
among them, pale and prim in her black dress. She sat between Aunt
Elizabeth and Uncle Wallace and dared not move a muscle. No other Starr
was present. Her father had no near living relatives. The Maywood
people came and looked at his dead face with a freedom and insolent
curiosity they would never have presumed on in life. Emily hated to
have them looking at her father like that. They had no right--they
hadn’t been friendly to him while he was alive--they had said harsh
things of him--Ellen Greene had sometimes repeated them. Every glance
that fell on him hurt Emily; but she sat still and gave no outward
sign. Aunt Ruth said afterwards that she had never seen a child so
absolutely devoid of all natural feeling.

When the service was over the Murrays rose and marched around the
coffin for a dutiful look of farewell. Aunt Elizabeth took Emily’s
hand and tried to draw her along with them but Emily pulled it back
and shook her head. She had said her good-bye already. Aunt Elizabeth
seemed for a moment to be on the point of insisting; then she grimly
swept onward, alone, looking every inch a Murray. No scene must be made
at a funeral.

Douglas Starr was to be taken to Charlottetown for burial beside his
wife. The Murrays were all going but Emily was not to go. She watched
the funeral procession as it wound up the long, grassy hill, through
the light grey rain that was beginning to fall. Emily was glad it was
raining; many a time she had heard Ellen Greene say that happy was the
corpse the rain fell on; and it was easier to see Father go away in
that soft, kind, grey mist than through sparkling, laughing sunshine.

“Well, I must say the funeral went off fine,” said Ellen Greene at
her shoulder. “Everything’s been done regardless. If your father was
looking down from heaven at it, Emily, I’m sure he’d be pleased.”

“He isn’t in heaven,” said Emily.

“Good gracious! Of all the children!” Ellen could say no more.

“He isn’t there _yet_. He’s only on the way. He said he’d wait around
and go slow until I died, too, so that I could catch up with him. I
hope I’ll die soon.”

“That’s a wicked, wicked thing to wish,” rebuked Ellen.

When the last buggy had disappeared Emily went back to the
sitting-room, got a book out of the bookcase, and buried herself in the
wing-chair. The women who were tidying up were glad she was quiet and
out of the way.

“It’s well she can read,” said Mrs. Hubbard gloomily. “Some little
girls couldn’t be so composed--Jennie Hood just screamed and shrieked
after they carried her mother out--the Hoods are all such a _feeling_
people.”

Emily was not reading. She was thinking. She knew the Murrays would be
back in the afternoon; and she knew her fate would probably be settled
then. “We’ll talk the matter over when we come back,” she had heard
Uncle Wallace saying that morning after breakfast. Some instinct told
her just what “the matter” was; and she would have given one of her
pointed ears to hear the discussion with the other. But she knew very
well she would be sent out of the way. So she was not surprised when
Ellen came to her in the twilight and said:

“You’d better go upstairs, Emily. Your aunts and uncles are coming in
here to talk over the business.”

“Can’t I help you get supper?” asked Emily, who thought that if she
were going and coming around the kitchen she might catch a word or two.

“No. You’d be more bother than help. March, now.”

Ellen waddled out to the kitchen, without waiting to see if Emily
marched. Emily got up reluctantly. How could she sleep to-night if she
did not know what was going to happen to her? And she felt quite sure
she would not be told till morning, if then.

Her eyes fell on the oblong table in the centre of the room. Its cloth
was of generous proportions, falling in heavy folds to the floor. There
was a flash of black stockings across the rug, a sudden disturbance
of drapery, and then--silence. Emily, on the floor under the table,
arranged her legs comfortably and sat triumphant. She would hear what
was decided and nobody would be any the wiser.

She had never been told that it was not considered strictly honourable
to eavesdrop, no occasion for such instruction ever having arisen in
her life with her father; and she considered that it was a bit of pure
luck that she had thought of hiding under the table. She could even see
dimly through the cloth. Her heart beat so loudly in her excitement
that she was afraid they would hear it; there was no other sound save
the soft, faraway singing of frogs through the rain, that sounded
through the open window.

In they came; down they sat around the room; Emily held her breath; for
a few minutes nobody spoke, though Aunt Eva sighed long and heavily.
Then Uncle Wallace cleared his throat and said,

“Well, what is to be done with the child?”

Nobody was in a hurry to answer. Emily thought they would _never_
speak. Finally Aunt Eva said with a whine,

“She’s such a difficult child--so odd. _I_ can’t understand her at all.”

“I think,” said Aunt Laura timidly, “that she has what one might call
an artistic temperament.”

“She’s a spoiled child,” said Aunt Ruth very decidedly. “There’s work
ahead to straighten out _her_ manners, if you ask me.”

(The little listener under the table turned her head and shot a
scornful glance at Aunt Ruth through the tablecloth. “_I_ think that
your own manners have a slight curve.” Emily did not dare even to
murmur the words under her breath, but she shaped them with her mouth;
this was a great relief and satisfaction.)

“I agree with you,” said Aunt Eva, “and I for one do not feel equal to
the task.”

(Emily understood that this meant Uncle Wallace didn’t mean to take her
and she rejoiced thereat.)

“The truth is,” said Uncle Wallace, “Aunt Nancy ought to take her. She
has more of this world’s goods than any of us.”

“Aunt Nancy would never dream of taking her and you know it well
enough!” said Uncle Oliver. “Besides, she’s entirely too old to have
the bringing up of a child--her and that old witch Caroline. Upon my
soul, I don’t believe either of them is human. I would like to take
Emily--but I feel that I can hardly do it. I’ve a large family to
provide for.”

“She’ll not likely live long to bother any one,” said Aunt Elizabeth
crisply. “She’ll probably die of consumption same as her father did.”

(“I won’t--I won’t!” exclaimed Emily--at least she _thought_ it with
such vim that it almost seemed that she exclaimed it. She forgot that
she had wanted to die soon, so that she could overtake Father. She
wanted to live now, just to put the Murrays in the wrong. “I haven’t
_any_ intention of dying. I’m going to live--for ages--and be a famous
_authoress_--you’ll just see if I don’t, Aunt Elizabeth Murray!”)

“She _is_ a weedy looking child,” acknowledged Uncle Wallace.

(Emily relieved her outraged feelings by making a face at Uncle Wallace
through the tablecloth. “If I ever possess a pig I am going to name
it after _you_,” she thought--and then felt quite satisfied with her
revenge.)

“Somebody has to look after her as long as she’s alive though, you
know,” said Uncle Oliver.

(“It would serve you all right if I _did_ die and you suffered terrible
remorse for it all the rest of your lives,” Emily thought. Then in
the pause that happened to follow, she dramatically pictured out her
funeral, selected her pall-bearers, and tried to choose the hymn verse
that she wanted engraved on her tombstone. But before she could settle
this Uncle Wallace began again.)

“Well, we are not getting anywhere. We have to look after the child--”

(“I _wish_ you wouldn’t call me ‘_the child_,’” thought Emily bitterly.)

“--and some of us must give her a home. Juliet’s daughter must not be
left to the mercy of strangers. Personally, I feel that Eva’s health is
not equal to the care and training of a child--”

“Of _such_ a child,” said Aunt Eva.

(Emily stuck her tongue out at Aunt Eva.)

“Poor little soul,” said Aunt Laura gently.

(Something frozen in Emily’s heart melted at that moment. She was
pitifully pleased over being called “poor little soul” so tenderly.)

“I do not think you need pity her overmuch, Laura,” said Uncle Wallace
decidedly. “It is evident that she has very little feeling. I have not
seen her shed a tear since we came here.”

“Did you notice that she would not even take a last look at her
father?” said Aunt Elizabeth.

Cousin Jimmy suddenly whistled at the ceiling.

“She feels so much that she has to hide it,” said Aunt Laura.

Uncle Wallace snorted.

“Don’t you think _we_ might take her, Elizabeth?” Laura went on timidly.

Aunt Elizabeth stirred restlessly.

“I don’t suppose she’d be contented at New Moon, with three old people
like us.”

(“I would--I would!” thought Emily.)

“Ruth, what about you?” said Uncle Wallace. “You’re all alone in that
big house. It would be a good thing for you to have some company.”

“I don’t like her,” said Aunt Ruth sharply. “She is as sly as a snake.”

(“I’m _not_!” thought Emily.)

“With wise and careful training many of her faults may be cured,” said
Uncle Wallace, pompously.

(“I don’t _want_ them cured!” Emily was getting angrier and angrier
all the time under the table. “I like _my_ faults better than I do
_your_--_your_--” she fumbled mentally for a word--then triumphantly
recalled a phrase of her father’s--“your _abominable_ virtues!”)

“I doubt it,” said Aunt Ruth, in a biting tone. “What’s bred in the
bone comes out in the flesh. As for Douglas Starr, I think that it was
perfectly disgraceful for him to die and leave that child without a
cent.”

“Did he do it on purpose?” asked Cousin Jimmy blandly. It was the first
time he had spoken.

“He was a miserable failure,” snapped Aunt Ruth.

“He wasn’t--he wasn’t!” screamed Emily, suddenly sticking her head out
under the tablecloth, between the end legs of the table.

For a moment the Murrays sat as silent and motionless as if her
outburst had turned them to stone. Then Aunt Ruth rose, stalked to the
table, and lifted the cloth, behind which Emily had retired in dismay,
realising what she had done.

“Get up and come out of that, Em’ly Starr!” said Aunt Ruth.

“Em’ly Starr” got up and came out. She was not specially
frightened--she was too angry to be that. Her eyes had gone black and
her cheeks crimson.

“What a little beauty--what a regular little beauty!” said Cousin
Jimmy. But nobody heard him. Aunt Ruth had the floor.

“You shameless little eavesdropper!” she said. “There’s the Starr blood
coming out--a Murray would never have done such a thing. You ought to
be whipped!”

“Father wasn’t a failure!” cried Emily, choking with anger. “You had no
right to call him a failure. Nobody who was loved as much as he was
could be a failure. I don’t believe anybody _ever_ loved you. So it’s
_you_ that’s a failure. And I’m _not_ going to die of consumption.”

“Do you realize what a shameful thing you’ve been guilty of?” demanded
Aunt Ruth, cold with anger.

“I wanted to hear what was going to become of me,” cried Emily. “I
didn’t know it was such a dreadful thing to do--I didn’t know you were
going to say such horrid things about me.”

“Listeners never hear any good of themselves,” said Aunt Elizabeth
impressively. “Your mother would _never_ have done that, Emily.”

The bravado all went out of poor Emily. She felt guilty and
miserable--oh, so miserable. She hadn’t known--but it seemed she had
committed a terrible sin.

“Go upstairs,” said Aunt Ruth.

Emily went, without a protest. But before going she looked around the
room.

“While I was under the table,” she said, “I made a face at Uncle
Wallace and stuck my tongue out at Aunt Eva.”

She said it sorrowfully, desiring to make a clean breast of her
transgressions; but so easily do we misunderstand each other that
the Murrays actually thought that she was indulging in a piece of
gratuitous impertinence. When the door had closed behind her they
all--except Aunt Laura and Cousin Jimmy--shook their heads and groaned.

Emily went upstairs in a state of bitter humiliation. She felt that she
had done something that gave the Murrays the right to despise her, and
they thought it was the Starr coming out in her--and she had not even
found out what her fate was to be.

She looked dismally at little Emily-in-the-glass.

“I didn’t know--I didn’t know,” she whispered. “But I’ll know after
this,” she added with sudden vim, “and I’ll never, _never_ do it
again.”

For a moment she thought she would throw herself on her bed and cry.
She _couldn’t_ bear all the pain and shame that were burning in her
heart. Then her eyes fell on the old yellow account book on her little
table. A minute later Emily was curled up on her bed, Turk-fashion,
writing eagerly in the old book with her little stubby lead pencil.
As her fingers flew over the faded lines her cheeks flushed and her
eyes shone. She forgot the Murrays although she was writing about
them--she forgot her humiliation--although she was describing what had
happened; for an hour she wrote steadily by the wretched light of her
smoky little lamp, never pausing, save now and then, to gaze out of the
window into the dim beauty of the misty night, while she hunted through
her consciousness for a certain word she wanted; when she found it she
gave a happy sigh and fell to again.

When she heard the Murrays coming upstairs she put her book away. She
had finished; she had written a description of the whole occurrence and
of that conclave ring of Murrays, and she had wound up by a pathetic
description of her own deathbed, with the Murrays standing around
imploring her forgiveness. At first she depicted Aunt Ruth as doing
it on her knees in an agony of remorseful sobs. Then she suspended
her pencil--“Aunt Ruth couldn’t _ever_ feel as bad as _that_ over
anything,” she thought--and drew her pencil through the line.

In the writing, pain and humiliation had passed away. She only felt
tired and rather happy. It _had_ been fun, finding words to fit Uncle
Wallace; and what exquisite satisfaction it had been to describe Aunt
Ruth as “a dumpy little woman.”

“I wonder what my uncles and aunts would say if they knew what I
_really_ think of them,” she murmured as she got into bed.




CHAPTER V

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND


Emily, who had been pointedly ignored by the Murrays at breakfast, was
called into the parlour when the meal was over.

They were all there--the whole phalanx of them--and it occurred to
Emily as she looked at Uncle Wallace, sitting in the spring sunshine,
that she had not just found the exact word after all to express his
peculiar quality of grimness.

Aunt Elizabeth stood unsmilingly by the table with slips of paper in
her hand.

“Emily,” she said, “last night we could not decide who should take you.
I may say that none of us feel very much like doing so, for you have
behaved very badly in many respects--”

“Oh, Elizabeth,--” protested Laura. “She--she is our sister’s child.”

Elizabeth lifted a hand regally.

“_I_ am doing this, Laura. Have the goodness not to interrupt me. As I
was saying, Emily, we could not decide as to who should have the care
of you. So we have agreed to Cousin Jimmy’s suggestion that we settle
the matter by lot. I have our names here, written on these slips of
paper. You will draw one and the one whose name is on it will give you
a home.”

Aunt Elizabeth held out the slips of paper. Emily trembled so violently
that at first she could not draw one. This was terrible--it seemed as
if she must blindly settle her own fate.

“Draw,” said Aunt Elizabeth.

Emily set her teeth, threw back her head with the air of one who
challenges destiny, and drew. Aunt Elizabeth took the slip from the
little shaking hand and held it up. On it was her own name--“Elizabeth
Murray.” Laura Murray suddenly put her handkerchief to her eyes.

“Well, that’s settled,” said Uncle Wallace, getting up with an air of
relief. “And if I’m going to catch that train I’ve got to hurry. Of
course, as far as the matter of expense goes, Elizabeth, I’ll do my
share.”

“We are not paupers at New Moon,” said Aunt Elizabeth rather coldly.
“Since it has fallen to me to take her, I shall do all that is
necessary, Wallace. I do not shirk my duty.”

“_I_ am her duty,” thought Emily. “Father said nobody ever liked a
duty. So Aunt Elizabeth will never like me.”

“You’ve got more of the Murray pride than all the rest of us put
together, Elizabeth,” laughed Uncle Wallace.

They all followed him out--all except Aunt Laura. She came up to Emily,
standing alone in the middle of the room, and drew her into her arms.

“I’m so glad, Emily--I’m so glad,” she whispered. “Don’t fret, dear
child. I love you already--and New Moon is a nice place, Emily.”

“It has--a pretty name,” said Emily, struggling for self-control.
“I’ve--always hoped--I could go with you, Aunt Laura. I think I am
going to cry--but it’s not because I’m sorry I’m going there. My
manners are _not_ as bad as you may think, Aunt Laura--and I wouldn’t
have listened last night if I’d known it was wrong.”

“Of course you wouldn’t,” said Aunt Laura.

“But I’m not a Murray, you know.”

Then Aunt Laura said a queer thing--for a Murray.

“Thank heaven for that!” said Aunt Laura.

Cousin Jimmy followed Emily out and overtook her in the little hall.
Looking carefully around to ensure privacy, he whispered,

“Your Aunt Laura is a great hand at making an apple turnover, pussy.”

Emily thought apple turnover sounded nice, though she did not know what
it was. She whispered back a question which she would never have dared
ask Aunt Elizabeth or even Aunt Laura.

“Cousin Jimmy, when they make a cake at New Moon, will they let me
scrape out the mixing-bowl and eat the scrapings?”

“Laura will--Elizabeth won’t,” whispered Cousin Jimmy solemnly.

“And put my feet in the oven when they get cold? And have a cooky
before I go to bed?”

“Answer same as before,” said Cousin Jimmy. “_I’ll_ recite my poetry
to you. It’s very few people I do that for. I’ve composed a thousand
poems. They’re not written down--I carry them here.” Cousin Jimmy
tapped his forehead.

“Is it very hard to write poetry?” asked Emily, looking with new
respect at Cousin Jimmy.

“Easy as rolling off a log if you can find enough rhymes,” said Cousin
Jimmy.

They all went away that morning except the New Moon people. Aunt
Elizabeth announced that they would stay until the next day to pack up
and take Emily with them.

“Most of the furniture belongs to the house,” she said, “so it won’t
take us long to get ready. There are only Douglas Starr’s books and his
few personal belongings to pack.”

“How shall I carry my cats?” asked Emily anxiously.

Aunt Elizabeth stared.

“Cats! You’ll take no cats, miss.”

“Oh, I must take Mike and Saucy Sal!” cried Emily wildly. “I can’t
leave them behind. I can’t live without a cat.”

“Nonsense! There are barn cats at New Moon, but they are never allowed
in the house.”

“Don’t you like cats?” asked Emily wonderingly.

“No, I do _not_.”

“Don’t you like the _feel_ of a nice, soft, fat cat?” persisted Emily.

“No; I would as soon touch a snake.”

“There’s a lovely old wax doll of your mother’s up there,” said Aunt
Laura. “I’ll dress it up for you.”

“I don’t like dolls--they can’t talk,” exclaimed Emily.

“Neither can cats.”

“Oh, can’t they! Mike and Saucy Sal can. Oh, I _must_ take them. Oh,
_please_, Aunt Elizabeth. I _love_ those cats. And they’re the only
things left in the world that love me. Please!”

“What’s a cat more or less on two hundred acres?” said Cousin Jimmy,
pulling his forked beard. “Take ’em along, Elizabeth.”

Aunt Elizabeth considered for a moment. She couldn’t understand why
anybody should want a cat. Aunt Elizabeth was one of those people who
never do understand anything unless it is told them in plain language
and hammered into their heads. And _then_ they understand it only with
their brains and not with their hearts.

“You may take _one_ of your cats,” she said at last, with the air of a
person making a great concession. “One--and no more. No, don’t argue.
You may as well learn first as last, Emily, that when _I_ say a thing I
mean it. That’s enough, Jimmy.”

Cousin Jimmy bit off something he had tried to say, stuck his hands in
his pockets, and whistled at the ceiling.

“When she won’t, she won’t--Murray like. We’re all born with that kink
in us, small pussy, and you’ll have to put up with it--more by token
that you’re full of it yourself, you know. Talk about your not being
Murray! The Starr is only skin deep with you.”

“It isn’t--I’m _all_ Starr--I _want_ to be,” cried Emily. “And, oh, how
can I choose between Mike and Saucy Sal?”

This was indeed a problem. Emily wrestled with it all day, her heart
bursting. She liked Mike best--there was no doubt of that; but she
_couldn’t_ leave Saucy Sal to Ellen’s tender mercies. Ellen had always
hated Sal; but she rather liked Mike and she would be good to him.
Ellen was going back to her own little house in Maywood village and she
wanted a cat. At last in the evening, Emily made her bitter decision.
She would take Saucy Sal.

“Better take the Tom,” said Cousin Jimmy. “Not so much bother with
kittens you know, Emily.”

“Jimmy!” said Aunt Elizabeth sternly. Emily wondered over the
sternness. Why weren’t kittens to be spoken of? But she didn’t like to
hear Mike called “the Tom.” It sounded insulting, someway.

And she didn’t like the bustle and commotion of packing up. She longed
for the old quiet and the sweet, remembered talks with her father.
She felt as if he had been thrust far away from her by this influx of
Murrays.

“What’s this?” said Aunt Elizabeth suddenly, pausing for a moment in
her packing. Emily looked up and saw with dismay that Aunt Elizabeth
had in her hands the old account book--that she was opening it--that
she was _reading_ in it. Emily sprang across the floor and snatched the
book.

“You mustn’t read that, Aunt Elizabeth,” she cried indignantly, “that’s
mine,--my own _private property_.”

“Hoity-toity, Miss Starr,” said Aunt Elizabeth, staring at her, “let
me tell you that I have a right to read your books. I am responsible
for you now. I am not going to have anything hidden or underhanded,
understand that. You have evidently something there that you are
ashamed to have seen and I mean to see it. Give me that book.”

“I’m _not_ ashamed of it,” cried Emily, backing away, hugging her
precious book to her breast. “But I won’t let you--or _anybody_--see
it.”

Aunt Elizabeth followed.

“Emily Starr, do you hear what I say? Give me that book--at _once_.”

“No--no!” Emily turned and ran. She would _never_ let Aunt Elizabeth
see that book. She fled to the kitchen stove--she whisked off a
cover--she crammed the book into the glowing fire. It caught and blazed
merrily. Emily watched it in agony. It seemed as if part of herself
were burning there. But Aunt Elizabeth should never see it--see all
the little things she had written and read to Father--all her fancies
about the Wind Woman, and Emily-in-the-glass--all her little cat
dialogues--all the things she had said in it last night about the
Murrays. She watched the leaves shrivel and shudder, as if they were
sentient things, and then turn black. A line of white writing came out
vividly on one. “Aunt Elizabeth is very cold and _hawty_.” What if
Aunt Elizabeth had seen _that_? What if she were seeing it now! Emily
glanced apprehensively over her shoulder. No, Aunt Elizabeth had gone
back to the room and shut the door with what, in anybody but a Murray,
would have been called a bang. The account book was a little heap of
white film on the glowing coals. Emily sat down by the stove and cried.
She felt as if she had lost something incalculably precious. It was
terrible to think that all those dear things were gone. She could never
write them again--not just the same; and if she could she wouldn’t
dare--she would never dare to write _anything_ again, if Aunt Elizabeth
must see everything. Father never insisted on seeing them. She liked to
read them to _him_--but if she hadn’t wanted to do it he would never
have made her. Suddenly Emily, with tears glistening on her cheeks,
wrote a line in an imaginary account book.

“Aunt Elizabeth is cold and hawty; and she is _not fair_.”

Next morning, while Cousin Jimmy was tying the boxes at the back of
the double-seated buggy, and Aunt Elizabeth was giving Ellen her final
instructions, Emily said good-bye to everything--to the Rooster Pine
and Adam-and-Eve--“they’ll miss me so when I’m gone; there won’t be
any one here to love them,” she said wistfully--to the spider crack
in the kitchen window--to the old wing-chair--to the bed of striped
grass--to the silver birch-ladies. Then she went upstairs to the window
of her own old room. That little window had always seemed to Emily to
open on a world of wonder. In the burned account book there had been
one piece of which she was especially proud. “A deskripshun of the
vew from my Window.” She had sat there and dreamed; at night she used
to kneel there and say her little prayers. Sometimes the stars shone
through it--sometimes the rain beat against it--sometimes the little
greybirds and swallows visited it--sometimes airy fragrances floated
in from apple and lilac blossom--sometimes the Wind Woman laughed
and sighed and sang and whistled round it--Emily had heard her there
in the dark nights and in wild, white winter storms. She did not say
good-bye to the Wind Woman, for she knew the Wind Woman would be at New
Moon, too; but she said good-bye to the little window and the green
hill she had loved, and to her fairy-haunted barrens and to little
Emily-in-the-glass. There might be another Emily-in-the-glass at New
Moon, but she wouldn’t be the same one. And she unpinned from the wall
and stowed away in her pocket the picture of the ball dress she had cut
from a fashion sheet. It was such a wonderful dress--all white lace
and wreaths of rosebuds, with a long, long, train of lace flounces
that must reach clear across a room. Emily had pictured herself a
thousand times wearing that dress, sweeping, a queen of beauty, across
a ballroom floor.

Downstairs they were waiting for her. Emily said good-bye to Ellen
Greene rather indifferently--she had never liked Ellen Greene at any
time, and since the night Ellen had told her her father was going to
die she had hated and feared her.

Ellen amazed Emily by bursting into tears and hugging her--begging her
not to forget her--asking her to write to her--calling her “my blessed
child.”

“I am not your blessed child,” said Emily, “but I will write to you.
And will you be very good to Mike?”

“I b’lieve you feel worse over leaving that cat than you do over
leaving me,” sniffed Ellen.

“Why, of course I do,” said Emily, amazed that there could be any
question about it.

It took all her resolution not to cry when she bade farewell to Mike,
who was curled up on the sun-warm grass at the back door.

“Maybe I’ll see you again sometime,” she whispered as she hugged him.
“I’m sure _good_ pussy cats go to heaven.”

Then they were off in the double-seated buggy with its fringed canopy,
always affected by the Murrays of New Moon. Emily had never driven in
anything so splendid before. She had never had many drives. Once or
twice her father had borrowed Mr. Hubbard’s old buckboard and grey pony
and driven to Charlottetown. The buckboard was rattly and the pony
slow, but Father had talked to her all the way and made the road a
wonder.

Cousin Jimmy and Aunt Elizabeth sat in front, the latter very imposing
in black lace bonnet and mantle. Aunt Laura and Emily occupied the seat
behind, with Saucy Sal between them in a basket, shrieking piteously.

Emily glanced back as they drove up the grassy lane, and thought the
little, old, brown house in the hollow had a broken-hearted look. She
longed to run back and comfort it. In spite of her resolution, the
tears came into her eyes; but Aunt Laura put a kid-gloved hand across
Sal’s basket and caught Emily’s in a close, understanding squeeze.

“Oh, I just love you, Aunt Laura,” whispered Emily.

And Aunt Laura’s eyes were very, very blue and deep and kind.




CHAPTER VI

NEW MOON


Emily found the drive through the blossomy June world pleasant. Nobody
talked much; even Saucy Sal had subsided into the silence of despair;
now and then Cousin Jimmy made a remark, more to himself, as it seemed,
than to anybody else. Sometimes Aunt Elizabeth answered it, sometimes
not. She always spoke crisply and used no unnecessary words.

They stopped in Charlottetown and had dinner. Emily, who had had no
appetite since her father’s death, could not eat the roast beef which
the boarding-house waitress put before her. Whereupon Aunt Elizabeth
whispered mysteriousl